---
layout: post
title:  "Configuring locales on Linux"
date:   2015-12-20 16:30:00
categories: Artikel
---

<p>
While modern desktop environments that are used on Linux set up the locale with
support for UTF-8, users who prefer not to run a desktop environment or users
who use SSH to work on remote computers occasionally face trouble setting up
their locale correctly.
</p>

<p>
On Linux, the locale is defined via the environment variables <code>LANG</code>
and a bunch of environment variables starting with <code>LC_</code>, e.g.
<code>LC_MESSAGES</code>.
</p>

<h2>Your system’s available locales</h2>

<p>
With <code>locale -a</code>, you can get a list of available locales, e.g.:
</p>
<pre>
$ locale -a
C
C.UTF-8
de_CH.utf8
en_DK.utf8
en_US.utf8
POSIX
</pre>

<p>
The format of these values is
<code>[language[_territory][.codeset][@modifier]]</code>, see <a
href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locale">wikipedia:Locale</a>.
</p>

<p>
You can configure the locales that should be generated on your system in
<code>/etc/locale.gen</code>. On Debian, <code>sudo dpkg-reconfigure
locales</code> brings up a front-end for that configuration file which
automatically runs <code>locale-gen(8)</code> after you’ve made changes.
</p>

<h2>The environment variables</h2>

<ol>
<li>
<code>LC_ALL</code> overrides all variables starting with <code>LC_</code> and
<code>LANG</code>.
</li>

<li>
<code>LANG</code> is the fallback when more specific <code>LC_</code>
environment variables are not set.
</li>

<li>
The individual <code>LC_</code> variables are documented in <a
href="http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/7908799/xbd/envvar.html#tag_002_002">The
Single UNIX ® Specification</a>.
</li>
</ol>

<p>
Based on the above, my advice is to never set <code>LC_ALL</code>, set
<code>LANG</code> to the locale you want to use and possibly override specific
aspects using the relevant <code>LC_</code> variables.
</p>

<p>
As an example, my personally preferred setup looks like this:
</p>
<pre>
unset LC_ALL
export LANG=de_CH.UTF-8
export LC_MESSAGES=C
export LC_TIME=en_DK.UTF-8
</pre>

<p>
This slightly peculiar setup sets <code>LANG=de_CH.UTF-8</code> so that the
default value corresponds to Switzerland, where I live.
</p>

<p>
Then, it specifies via <code>LC_MESSAGES=C</code> that I prefer program output
to not be translated. This corresponds to programs having English output in all
cases that are relevant to me, but strictly speaking you could come across
programs whose untranslated language isn’t English, so maybe you’d prefer
<code>LC_MESSAGES=en_US.UTF-8</code>.
</p>

<p>
Finally, via <code>LC_TIME=en_DK.UTF-8</code>, I configure date/time output to
use the ISO8601 output, i.e. YYYY-mm-dd HH:MM:SS and a 24-hour clock.
</p>

<h2>Displaying the current locale setup</h2>

<p>
By running <code>locale</code> without any arguments, you can see the currently
effective locale configuration:
</p>

<pre>
$ locale
LANG=de_CH.UTF-8
LANGUAGE=
LC_CTYPE="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_NUMERIC="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_TIME=en_DK.UTF-8
LC_COLLATE="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_MONETARY="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_MESSAGES=C
LC_PAPER="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_NAME="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_ADDRESS="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_TELEPHONE="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_MEASUREMENT="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_IDENTIFICATION="de_CH.UTF-8"
LC_ALL=
</pre>

<h2>Where to set the environment variables?</h2>

<p>
Unfortunately, there is no single configuration file that allows you to set
environment variables. Instead, each shell reads a slightly different set of
configuration files, see <a
href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_shell#Configuration_files">wikipedia:Unix_shell#Configuration_files</a>
for an overview. If you’re unsure which shell you are using, try using
<code>readlink /proc/$$/exe</code>.
</p>

<p>
Configuring the environment variables in the shell covers logins on the text
console and via SSH, but you’ll still need to set the environment variables for
graphical sessions. If you’re using a desktop environment such as GNOME, the
desktop environment will configure the locale for you. If you’re using a window
manager, you should be using an Xsession script (typically found in
<code>~/.xsession</code> or <code>~/.xinitrc</code>).
</p>

<p>
To keep the configuration centralized, I recommend you create a file that you
can include from both your shell config and your Xsession:
</p>

<pre>
cat > ~/.my_locale_env <<'EOT'
unset LC_ALL
export LANG=de_CH.UTF-8
export LC_MESSAGES=C
export LC_TIME=en_DK.UTF-8
EOT

echo 'source ~/.my_locale_env' >> ~/.zshrc
sed -i '2isource ~/.my_locale_env' ~/.xsession
</pre>

<p>
Remember to make these settings both on your local machines and on the
machines you log into remotely.
</p>

<h3>Non-interactive SSH sessions</h3>

<p>
Notably, the above setup only covers interactive sessions. When you run e.g.
<code>ssh server ls /tmp</code>, ssh will actually use a <a
href="http://unix.stackexchange.com/a/46856">non-interactive non-login
shell</a>. For most shells, this means that the usual configuration files are
not read.
</p>

<p>
In order for your locale setup to apply to non-interactive SSH commands as
well, ensure that your SSH client is configured with <code>SendEnv LANG
LC_*</code> to send the environment variables to the SSH server when
connecting. On the server, you’ll need to have <code>AcceptEnv LANG LC_*</code>
configured. Recent versions of OpenSSH include these settings by default in
<code>/etc/ssh/ssh_config</code> and <code>/etc/ssh/sshd_config</code>,
respectively. If that’s not the case on your machine, use <code>echo "SendEnv
LANG LC_*" >> ~/.ssh/config</code>.
</p>

<p>
To verify which variables are getting sent, run SSH with the <code>-v</code>
flag and look for the line “debug1: Sending environment.”:
</p>
<pre>
$ ssh localhost env
[…]
debug1: Sending environment.
debug1: Sending env LC_TIME = en_DK.UTF-8
debug1: Sending env LANG = de_CH.UTF-8
debug1: Sending env LC_MESSAGES = C
debug1: Sending command: env
[…]
</pre>

<h2>Debugging locale issues</h2>

<p>
You can introspect the locale-related environment variables of any process by
inspecting the <code>/proc/${PID}/environ</code> file (where
<code>${PID}</code> stands for the process id of the process). As an example,
this is how you verify your window manager is using the expected configuration,
provided you use i3:
</p>

<pre>
$ tr '\0' '\n' < /proc/$(pidof i3)/environ | grep -e '^\(LANG\|LC_\)'
LC_MESSAGES=C
LANG=de_CH.UTF-8
LC_TIME=en_DK.UTF-8
</pre>

<p>
In order for Unicode text input to work, your terminal emulator (e.g.
<code>urxvt</code>) and the program you are using inside it (e.g. your shell,
like <code>zsh</code>, or a terminal multiplexer like <code>screen</code>, or a
chat program like <code>irssi</code>, etc.) both should use a locale whose
codeset is UTF-8.
</p>

<p>
A good end-to-end test could be to run the following <code>perl</code> command:
</p>
<pre>
$ perl -MPOSIX -Mlocale -e 'print strftime("%c", localtime) . "\n"'
2015-12-20T16:22:09 CET
</pre>

<p>
In case your locales are misconfigured, <code>perl</code> will complain loudly:
</p>
<pre>
$ LC_TIME=en_AU.UTF-8 perl -MPOSIX -Mlocale -e 'print strftime("%c", localtime) . "\n"'
perl: warning: Setting locale failed.
perl: warning: Please check that your locale settings:
	LANGUAGE = (unset),
	LC_ALL = (unset),
	LC_TIME = "en_AU.UTF-8",
	LC_MESSAGES = "C",
	LANG = "de_CH.UTF-8"
    are supported and installed on your system.
perl: warning: Falling back to a fallback locale ("de_CH.UTF-8").
Son 20 Dez 2015 16:22:58 CET
</pre>
