---
layout: post
title:  "Wake-On-LAN with Debian on a qnap TS-119P2+"
date:   2014-01-28 21:30:00
categories: Artikel
Aliases:
  - /Artikel/qnap_ts119_wol
---


<p>
The original firmware for the <a
href="http://www.qnap.com/en/index.php?sn=822&c=1655&sc=1656&t=1658&n=3320">qnap
TS-119P2+</a> supports <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wake-on-LAN">Wake-On-LAN</a>, meaning you
can power down your Network Storage (NAS) when you don’t need it and you can
easily wake it up by sending it a magic ethernet packet. This is an awesome
feature when you are not at home all the time (say, you have a day job) and
want to conserve some power without giving up on convenience.
</p>

<p>
Martin Michlmayr published <a
href="http://www.cyrius.com/debian/kirkwood/qnap/ts-119/">an excellent website
about using Debian on the qnap TS-11x/TS-12x</a> devices, which made it really
easy to install Debian on my NAS.
</p>

<p>
Unfortunately, until very recently, with a standard Linux kernel you could not
use Wake-On-LAN with the qnap devices. There were multiple reasons for that:
</p>
<ol>
<li>
The Linux ethernet driver for the Marvell MV643xx series chips, which those NAS
use, did simply not support configuring the chip for Wake-On-LAN. I <a
href="https://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/drivers/net/ethernet/marvell/mv643xx_eth.c?id=3871c3876f8084a2f40ba3c3fc20a6bb5754d88d">fixed
this in the Linux kernel on 2013-03-11</a>, the fix was released with Linux
3.10.
</li>

<li>
On the qnap NAS, there is a microcontroller which also needs to be configured
with regards to the power-saving mode it should use. The NAS has a feature
called EUP, which stands for “Energy-using Products”, a EU directive for power
saving. When you enable EUP, your qnap sleeps so deep, it will not react to the
WOL magic packet. This saves another watt or so. To turn this off, qcontrol <a
href="http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=703888">needed to be
patched</a> to provide access to the WOL and EUP bits.
</li>

<li>
And finally, the Debian kernel just did not enable the
<code>CONFIG_MARVELL_PHY</code> configuration option which you need to actually
make use of the kernel patch I landed in Linux 3.10. <a
href="http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=723177">The bug I filed
for this was fixed</a> with the linux package in version 3.12.8-1.
</li>
</ol>

<h2>Minimum package versions</h2>

<p>
To use Wake-On-LAN, you’ll need to install <a
href="http://packages.debian.org/sid/linux-image-3.12-1-kirkwood">linux-image-3.12-1-kirkwood
≥ 3.12.8-1</a>. Furthermore, you’ll need <a
href="http://packages.debian.org/sid/qcontrol">qcontrol ≥ 0.5.2-2</a>. Note
that you will also perhaps need to build qcontrol from git to disable the real
time clock. Once there is a new package available, I’ll update this paragraph.
</p>

<h2>Enabling Wake-On-LAN</h2>

<p>
What you’ll need once is disabling EUP and RTC (real-time clock). You need to
disable the RTC because otherwise the NAS is confused about scheduled wake-up
and will immediately wake up after you power it down:
</p>

<pre>
qnap # qcontrol eup off
qnap # qcontrol rtc off
</pre>

<p>
Before every shutdown, you need to enable Wake-On-LAN:
</p>
<pre>
qnap # ethtool -s eth0 wol g
qnap # qcontrol wakeonlan on
</pre>

<p>
I like to turn off WOL after booting because I <strong>think</strong> (haven’t
done enough testing to definitely confirm it) that the microcontroller gets
confused when it receives a WOL packet while the box is running. In that case,
it will immediately power back up after you power down.
</p>

<p>
Once you enabled WOL, power off the NAS, and try turning it back on from
another machine:
</p>

<pre>
qnap # ip link show eth0
qnap # poweroff
x200 $ wakeonlan 00:08:9b:de:22:ff
</pre>

<p>
Note that you must not disconnect the device entirely from power, as the
microcontroller will lose its state. That means, when you have a power outage,
you need to power on the NAS manually once.
</p>

<h2>Making the WOL setup persistent</h2>

<p>
With the following systemd unit, you’ll get WOL disabled during runtime and
enabled before powering off:
</p>

<pre>
[Unit]
Description=Enable Wake on LAN on shutdown
# Just for having the correct order when shutting down.
After=qcontrold.service
# Require eth0 to be present before trying to change WOL.
Requires=sys-devices-platform-mv643xx_eth_port.0-net-eth0.device
After=sys-devices-platform-mv643xx_eth_port.0-net-eth0.device

[Service]
Type=oneshot
RemainAfterExit=yes
ExecStart=/sbin/ethtool -s eth0 wol d
ExecStart=/usr/sbin/qcontrol wakeonlan off
ExecStop=/sbin/ethtool -s eth0 wol g
ExecStop=/usr/sbin/qcontrol wakeonlan on

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
</pre>

<p>
You can find the newest version of <a
href="https://github.com/stapelberg/zkj-nas-tools/blob/master/wol-shutdown.service">this
service file on github</a>.
</p>

<h2>Automatically powering off</h2>

<p>
I wrote a program called <a
href="https://github.com/stapelberg/zkj-nas-tools/tree/master/dramaqueen">dramaqueen</a>,
which will power off the NAS once it realizes that there are no more CIFS
(Samba) sessions established. In addition to the CIFS checks, you can also set
custom inhibitors, for example for running a backup.
</p>

<p>
To cross-compile dramaqueen for the qnap, use:
</p>
<pre>
$ go get github.com/stapelberg/zkj-nas-tools/dramaqueen
$ GOARCH=arm GOARM=5 go build github.com/stapelberg/zkj-nas-tools/dramaqueen
$ file dramaqueen 
dramaqueen: ELF 32-bit LSB  executable, ARM, EABI5 version 1 (SYSV), …
</pre>

<p>
In my setup, once I suspend my workstation (and all other machines using the
NAS), the NAS will notice that my session has gone and shut itself down after
10 minutes.
</p>
